cPCA abstract:

Visualization and exploration of high-dimensional data is a ubiquitous challenge across disciplines. Widely used techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA) aim to identify dominant trends in one dataset. However, in many settings we have datasets collected under different conditions, e.g., a treatment and a control experiment, and we are interested in visualizing and exploring patterns that are specific to one dataset. This paper proposes a method, contrastive principal component analysis (cPCA), which identifies low-dimensional structures that are enriched in a dataset relative to comparison data. In a wide variety of experiments, we demonstrate that cPCA with a background dataset enables us to visualize dataset-specific patterns missed by PCA and other standard methods. We further provide a geometric interpretation of cPCA and strong mathematical guarantees. An implementation of cPCA is publicly available, and can be used for exploratory data analysis in many applications where PCA is currently used.

Our abstract:

Capturing patterns of variation present in a dataset is important in exploratory data analysis and unsupervised learning. Popular methods include principal component analysis (PCA) identify patterns which may be systematic or technical variation that are not of substantive interest. Contrastive principlal component analysis (cPCA), provides a solution by finding patterns of variation unique to a target dataset of interest by contrasting with a carefully chosen background dataset representing unwanted or uninteresting variation. However, many scientific applications collect multiple datasets under various conditions, requiring a method which finds patterns of variation specific to one dataset relative to other dataset(s).  We propose a tuning parameter free, high-dimensional capable method, unique component analysis (UCA), which identifies low-dimensional representations of a target dataset relative to one or more comparison datasets. We show in several experiments that UCA with a single background dataset achieves similar results compared to cPCA with various tuning parameters, and that UCA with multiple individual background datasets is superior to both UCA with any single background data and UCA with a pooled background dataset. UCA is publically available and enables us to visualize dataset-specific variability missed by pooling in any situation where more than one background dataset is available.
