cPCA abstract:

Visualization and exploration of high-dimensional data is a ubiquitous challenge across disciplines. Widely used techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA) aim to identify dominant trends in one dataset. However, in many settings we have datasets collected under different conditions, e.g., a treatment and a control experiment, and we are interested in visualizing and exploring patterns that are specific to one dataset. This paper proposes a method, contrastive principal component analysis (cPCA), which identifies low-dimensional structures that are enriched in a dataset relative to comparison data. In a wide variety of experiments, we demonstrate that cPCA with a background dataset enables us to visualize dataset-specific patterns missed by PCA and other standard methods. We further provide a geometric interpretation of cPCA and strong mathematical guarantees. An implementation of cPCA is publicly available, and can be used for exploratory data analysis in many applications where PCA is currently used.

Our abstract:

Capturing patterns of variation present in a dataset is important in exploratory data analysis and unsupervised learning. Contrastive dimension reduction methods, such as contrastive principal component analysis (cPCA), find patterns unique to a target dataset of interest by contrasting with a carefully chosen background dataset representing unwanted or uninteresting variation. However, such methods typically require a tuning parameter that governs the level of contrast, and it is unclear how to choose this parameter objectively. Furthermore, it is frequently of interest to contrast against multiple backgrounds, which is difficult to accomplish with existing methods. We propose unique component analysis (UCA), a tuning-free method that identifies low-dimensional representations of a target dataset relative to one or more comparison datasets. It is computationally efficient even with large numbers of features. We show in several experiments that UCA with a single background dataset achieves similar results compared to cPCA with various tuning parameters, and that UCA with multiple individual background datasets is superior to both cPCA with any single background data and cPCA with a pooled background dataset.
